
Farm Glossary

Farming in Canada can be full of a lot of confusing terminology and lingo. Even those working in the industry can get confused if, for example, they work in a greenhouse but don’t know anything about raising chickens. Here’s a glossary of terms that are commonly used in agriculture

 
A

    Acre
    1 acre = 43,560 sq. ft. or 0.405 hectares

 

    Agronomy
    Branch of agriculture that deals with field crop production and soil management. Agronomists generally work with crops that are grown on a large scale (e.g., small grains) and that require relatively little management.

 

    Artificial Insemination
    The use of frozen semen from selected sires to breed animals. It allows farmers to use top genetics to improve each generation of new animals.

 

    Avian Influenza (AI or Bird Flu)
    A virus that infects wild birds and domestic poultry (such as chickens, turkeys, ducks, and geese). Some forms of the flu in birds are worse than others.

 
B

    Barrow
    A male pig that has been castrated.

 

    Bedding
    Material such as straw, wood chips or sand used as a floor covering in barns for animal comfort.

 

    Beneficial Insects
    Beneficial insects can be useful in integrated pest management of row crops and gardens. They are a form of biological control in that their activity reduces the activity of certain pest species.

 

    Biological Control
    Controlling plants, diseases, and animal pests using natural enemies; or inhibiting the reproduction of pests by methods that result in the laying of infertile eggs, etc.

 

    Biological Diversity
    Richness and abundance of species, and variety of natural communities. Both the number of species and the number of individuals within each species are important in considering the extent of biological diversity in an area. Also referred to as biodiversity.

 

    Biosecurity
    A program to protect barns, animals and poultry from outside dirt and germs. Visitors are asked to wear clean clothes, wash their boots and even sometimes have a shower to ensure they don’t bring any germs into the facility.

 

    Biostimulant
    Are substances or microorganisms whose function, when applied to plants or the rhizosphere (soil zone directly surrounding the roots), is to stimulate natural processes to benefit nutrient uptake, nutrient use efficiency, tolerance to abiotic stress and/or crop quality, independently of its nutrient content.

 

    Biotechnology
    1) bio = life, technology = practical application of knowledge
2) the application of science and engineering in the direct and indirect use of living organisms, or parts or products of living organisms, in their natural or modified forms (e.g. using microorganisms to make wine or cheese)

 

    Bird boomers
    One acoustical option is a propane-fired, bird-scaring cannon —also known as a bird banger — that emits cannon like sounds. Bird bangers are very effective for scaring birds away from field crops. Double-firing bird bangers were found to protect more than twice the area of a single-firing one. Today most bird bangers are triple-firing ones that are even more effective.

 

    Boar
    Adult male pig.

 

    Bovine
    Animals that are members of the cattle family.

 

    Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE)
    Commonly known as “mad cow disease,” BSE is a slowly progressive, incurable disease affecting the central nervous system of cattle, first diagnosed in Britain in 1986. Consumption by cattle of BSE-contaminated ruminant proteins in animal feed has been cited as one possible means of transmission.

 

    Break in the Growing Process (Mushroom)
    Mushrooms are generally harvested for 3 to 5 days, followed by several days when no mature mushrooms are present. The period between harvesting is used for watering the casing layer. This cycle is repeated in a rhythmic fashion for the duration of the crop and is also called a break or flush.

 

    Broiler Chicken
    A meat chicken raised to the weight of 2.65 kg or under.

 

    Brown Agaricus
    A type of mushroom that is brown and 2.4 inches in diameter. Also known as a common field mushroom.

 

    Buck
    Male goat.

 

    Buck
    Mature, male deer.

 

    Buckling
    A young, male goat (teenager).

 

    Buffer strip
    Helps prevent water contamination by filtering out soil, fertilizers and manure before they enter a stream.

 

    Buffer Zone
    This is the naturalized area that farmers often leave next to a body of water such as a stream or pond. Buffer zones help to prevent water contamination by filtering out soil, fertilizers, and manure and other nutrients before they enter a stream. They also can reduce soil erosion, and promote biodiversity by providing shelter and food for a wide variety of animals, birds and fish.

 

    Bulk Milk Tank
    A refrigerated stainless steel storage unit in which milk is cooled quickly to 1°C to 4°C (35° F to 39° F) and stored.

 

    Bull
    A mature, male bovine.

 

    Bushel
    A unit of volume that is used for measuring agricultural produce such as corn or beans. A bushel is equivalent in volume to eight gallons.

 
C

    Calf
    A newborn bovine.

 

    Calf hutches
    The white, domed, igloo-like structures that some farmers use as individual housing units for dairy calves.

 

    Candling
    A process where the egg is passed over a strong light to make the interior of the egg visible. This allows the grader to see the condition of the shell, the size of the air cell and whether the yolk is well-centered.

 

    Cervids
    Elk and deer are both Cervids, which means they are members of the Cervidae (or deer) family.

 

    Chevon
    Meat that comes from adult goats.

 

    Chick
    The term for a baby chicken (male or female) until it is about three weeks of age.

 

    Cockerel
    A young male chicken.

 

    Coco coir
    A by product of coconut production. It is coconut fiber that gets shredded up and has really good drainage perfect for growing a high quality crop.

 

    Colostrum
    The first milk that any animal (including humans) produce after they give birth. This milk helps to pass along the mother’s immunity to disease to her offspring.

 

    Conservation or no tillage farming
    In conservation tillage, crops are grown with minimal or no cultivation of the soil. Any organic matter remaining from a previous year´s crop is left on the soil, building up its organic matter. In addition, populations of beneficial insects are maintained, soil and nutrients are less likely to be lost from the field and less time, labour and fuel are required to prepare the field for planting, thus reducing our greenhouse gas emissions.

 

    Contour Farming
    Field operations such as plowing, planting, cultivating, and harvesting on the contour, or at right angles to the natural slope to reduce soil erosion, protect soil fertility, and use water more efficiently.

 

    Corn
    Corn is a crop that is planted in the spring and harvested in the fall. It is usually used in one of two ways:
        Corn Silage: The whole plant is harvested while it is still green and is stored in a silo. After the silage is stored in the silo, the wet corn undergoes fermentation, or pickling. In this process, the corn is changed by a bacterial process to make it tastier and easier to digest by the cows. When the silage comes out of the silo it is more palatable. The same process turns wet hay into haylage.
        Grain Corn: Only the kernels from the plant are harvested and are stored in a dry form. Grain corn is usually ground up and mixed with any barley or oats, a protein food like soybean meal, plus vitamins and minerals.

 

    Cow
    A mature, female bovine.

 

    Cow/calf farm
    Beef cows and calves typically live on pasture in spring, summer and fall on farms called cow/calf farms where they eat a diet of mostly grasses.

 

    Crop Rotation
    Farmers use crop rotation to improve soil health and control pests. For example, the roots of a grain crop like wheat are similar to the grass in your lawn while the roots of corn tend to me more like a carrot, or tap root. Planting different crops each year also help keep insects and weeds from building up as different crops are appealing to different pests.

 

    Cucumeris
    Neoseiulus cucumeris, the cucumeris mite, is a species of predatory mite in the family Phytoseiidae. It is used in biological pest control of western flower thrips in cucumber and some other greenhouse crops.

 
D

    Doe
    Female goat.

 

    Doe
    Mature, female deer.

 

    Doeling
    A young, female goat (teenager).

 

    Drinkers
    Automated water lines in barns for animals or poultry to drink from.

 

    Dry Cow
    A cow that is waiting to give birth and who is not producing milk.

 
E

    E. coli 0157:H7 (Escherichia Coli 0157:H7)
    A bacterium that lives harmlessly in the intestines of animals such as cattle. However, in humans the bacterium, which can be transmitted through foods, can cause bloody diarrhea, and also lead to a life threatening disease. Although other known strains of E. coli are thought to be harmless to humans, the 0157:H7 strain is particularly virulent and dangerous.

 

    Emu
    The emu is the second largest member of the ratite family, by height, next to the Ostrich and is the largest bird native to Australia.

 

    Ewe
    A female sheep that has had a lamb.

 

    Ewe lamb
    A female sheep that has not yet given birth to a lamb.

 
F

    Fallacis
    Fallacis is an extremely effective spider mite predator and preventer. Usually one application is enough to achieve multi-year spider mite control.

 

    Farmers Market
    A market where producers, generally farmers, sell their goods directly to consumers.

 

    Farrow
    The term used when a pig gives birth.

 

    Fawn
    A young deer.

 

    Feed
    Commercially prepared food for animals made from grain, fortified with vitamins and minerals to optimize animal nutrition.

 

    Feeder Pig
    Piglet after it is weaned from the sow (its mother). They are also known as “weaner” pigs.

 

    Feeders
    Automated feed machines which dispense chicken feed (they allow the birds 24-hour access to feed).

 

    Feedlot
    Cattle being raised for market are moved to feedlots (penned yards) from the open range and pastures for the final months before marketing. They’re fed a high-energy diet of grains, corn or hay silage or hay. The consistent, high quality feed brings them to market weight faster then on grass alone.

 

    Fertilizer
    Any natural or synthetic material added to soil to supply plants with essential nutrients.

 

    Fleece
    A sheep’s wool after it has been shorn off, in one piece.

 

    Flock
    A group of chickens raised by a farmer.

 

    Flock
    A group of sheep.

 

    Flush
    A crop or harvest of mushrooms.

 

    Foot-and-mouth Disease (FMD)
    A major disease of cloven-footed animals (e.g., cattle and pigs).

 

    Free Stall dairy barn
    In this type of barn, dairy cows are housed in large group pens or individual stalls. They get milked by walking to a milking parlour or a milking robot.

 
G

    Genetic Engineering
    Use of specific laboratory techniques to introduce gene(s) from one species into the genome of another.

 

    Genetic Modification
    Changing the genetic traits of an organism by intentional manipulations or modifications either through traditional plant breeding or genetic engineering.

 

    Genetically Modified Organism
    A product of genetic modification, however often used in the media to describe a product of genetic engineering specifically.

 

    Gestation
    Length of pregnancy.

 

    Gilt
    A female pig that has never farrowed (given birth).

 

    Greenhouse
    A greenhouse is a structure that allows people to regulate climatic conditions, such as temperature and humidity.

 

    Green Manure
    A crop planted with the intention of turning it under for use as organic matter.

 

    Groundwater
    Water within the earth that supplies wells and springs.

 
H

    HACCP
    Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP). This is a quality assurance program that identifies risk factors (critical points) to reduce them to an absolute minimum.

 

    Hay
    A mixture of grass and legumes, like alfalfa. It is most commonly used in two ways: Haylage: the hay is cut, chopped and stored in a loose way in a storage silo, while it is still moist. Hay: usually cut after haylage when the plants are taller, it is allowed to dry in the field. It is then baled into round or square bales and stored under cover.

 

    Hectare (ha)
    A metric measure of area equal to 10,000 square meters. One hectare=2.47 acres.

 

    Heifer
    A young female bovine that has not yet had a calf.

 

    Herbicide
    Any pesticide used to destroy or inhibit plant growth; a weed killer.

 

    Holstein
    The black and white breed of dairy cows, most commonly seen on dairy farms in Canada.

 

    Hybrid
    Plants produced by crossing two or more inbred lines of plants that are genetically quite different.

 
I

    Insecticide
    A pesticide used to kill, deter, or control insects.

 

    Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
    A system of managing pests (weeds, insects, disease, fungus, nematodes, rodents) that involves more than one control method – mechanical (e.g. tillage), cultural (e.g. using certified seed), biological (e.g. use of a pest’s natural enemies), or chemical (e.g. pesticides) – in a program that is both economically and environmentally sound. Prevention is the key to IPM and farmers work hard to identify which pests may cause problems in their fields, and which are harmless.

 

    Irrigation
    Applying water (or wastewater) to land areas to supply water to the plants.

 
K

    Kid
    A newborn goat.

 
L

    Lactation
    The secretion of milk by the mammary glands. Animals only produce milk only after they have given birth.

 

    Lamb
    A sheep under one year of age.

 

    Layer farm
    This is where laying hens are housed. Hens lay eggs for 52 to 60 weeks. During this time they will produce about 300 eggs.

 

    Laying hen
    The term used to describe a hen after she starts laying eggs at 18-20 weeks of age.

 

    Litter
    A group of piglets born at one time from the same sow.

 
M

    Manure
    The original fertilizer. When used correctly, it builds organic matter, which helps hold water and nutrients in the soil. Manure contains three major nutrients: nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium, and also adds valuable organic matter to the soil.

 

    Marginal land
    Land that is too hilly, wet, or contains soils that are fragile and of lower quality for crop production.

 

    Market Hog
    Either a barrow (neutered male pig) or gilt (female pig that hasn’t given birth) that is raised for meat production.

 

    Micro-climate
    Microclimate of plant is the condition at around plant , from the depth root zone to he highest upper canopy.

 

    Mutton
    Meat from mature sheep (not lambs)

 

    Mycellium
    The mass of branched fibers comprising the vegetative part of a fungus. The substance can be used to grow strong and compostable material in different shapes.

 
N

    N, P, K
    Nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium; the three major nutrients in manure.

 

    Nutrient
    Any chemical element or compound essential to the growth and development of an organism.

 

    Nutrient Management
    A plan designed specifically for an individual farm by each farmer that helps them determine how much manure they can use on their land – it tells them the right amount of fertilizer plants need in order to grow a healthy and plentiful crop in an environmentally-friendly way.

 

    Nutrient Management
    The practice of applying fertilizers and plant nutrients such as manures in a time and manner to best ensure they will be taken up by growing plants and not leach into the groundwater or wash away.

 
O

    Organic Matter
    Dead plant or animal material (like manure) found in soil.

 

    Ostrich
    The Ostrich is the largest member of the “ratite” family and the largest living species of bird in the world. Ostrich are native to Africa.

 
P

    Pesticides
    Used to destroy pests. Fungicides (destroys fungus), herbicides (destroys plants), insecticides (destroys insects), and nematicides (destroys nematodes) are all pesticides.

 

    Peat Moss
    Is used widely in the production of mushroom casing layers, substrate fillers, and acts as a moisture retainer and aerator.

 

    Persimilis
    Phytoseiulus persimilis is a predatory mite native to Chile commonly used for the control of two-spotted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae) in fruit, ornamental, and vegetable crops.

 

    Piglet
    A newborn pig.

 

    Polled
    Breeds of goats or cattle that are naturally born without horns.

 

    Poults
    From the time they hatch until they’re 14 days old, young turkeys are called ‘poults’. They’re covered with a soft yellow “down” and make a peeping sound.

 

    Pullet
    A young female chicken.

 

    Pullet farm
    Egg farmers either raise their own pullets or buy them from pullet farms. Within 24 hours of being hatched, chicks are transported to pullet farms where they are raised until they are old enough to lay eggs. At 18 to 20 weeks of age, pullets are transported to layer farms and are then referred to as laying hens.

 
R

    Ratite
    Any member of the group of flightless birds like ostrich, emu or rheas that have a flat breastbone without the keel-like prominence characteristic of most flying birds. This means that they lack a strong anchor for their wing muscles and could not fly even if they did develop suitable wings. The name ratite comes from the Latin word for raft (ratis), because their breastbone looks like a raft.

 

    Rhea
    The Rhea is another member of the ratite family, native to South America. These flightless birds are smaller than the Ostrich and the Emu.

 

    Riparian
    Pertaining to the area along the banks of a river, stream, or lake.

 

    Roaster Chicken
    A larger meat chicken raised to the weight of over 2.65 kg.

 

    Rotation (Grain Farming)
    Crop rotation is the practice of planting different crops sequentially on the same plot of land to improve soil health, optimize nutrients in the soil, and combat pest and weed pressure.

 

    Ruminant
    A four-stomached animal like cattle, sheep, goats, deer or bison.

 

    Rut
    Breeding season for deer. It usually starts in September and lasts until early November.

 
S

    Silo
    Silos are extremely useful to store a wide variety of livestock feeds, including silage. A silo can be vertical (like a tower) or horizontal (called a bunker).

 

    Slatted floors
    A barn floor with open spaces to allow manure and other material to pass through. This keeps the barn cleaner for the animals to live in.

 

    Snood
    The snood is the fleshy growth that hangs down over the beak of a turkey.

 

    Soil Type
    The texture of the soil. This is based on the percentage of sand, silt, and clay. As examples, sandy soils drain water quickly while clay soils hold water and often require tile drainage.

 

    Sow
    An adult female pig that has given birth.

 

    Spawn 
    A mushroom spawn is used to start the process to grow mushrooms. Much like a gardener uses seeds, a mushroom farmer uses the genetic material of a mushroom.

 

    Spotted wing drosophila
    Drosophila suzukii, commonly called the spotted wing drosophila or SWD, is a fruit fly. D. suzukii, originally from southeast Asia, is becoming a major pest species in America and Europe, because it infests fruit early during the ripening stage

 

    Steer
    A castrated, male bovine.

 

    Substrate
    The material used to help mushrooms grow. A substrate may serve as a food source for an organism, or provide support. Examples include; straw, cardboard, logs, and woodchips.

 

    Supply Management
    The system under which the Canadian chicken, egg, turkey and dairy industries operate. This quota system ensures that farmers of these types of animal and poultry produce the amount of product needed for Canadian consumers. Supply management balances supply with demand and prevents overproduction, flooded markets and depressed prices for farmers. It allows these industries to remain sustainable and profitable for farmers.

 
T

    Tabletop strawberry
    Plants are grown in troughs which sit in a gutter that is raised several feet off the ground, about waist height, which is where it gets the nickname “tabletop”.

 

    Technology 
    Farmers use a wide variety of technology for grain farming. GPS systems for planting, spraying, and harvesting are used to collect data for yield purposes. It is also used to collect data on the soil conditions in the field. This can help determine what the next steps are for the producer.

 

    Tie Stall dairy barn
    In this type of barn, dairy cows are tied in stalls next to each other. They have constant access to water and are fed in a manger in front of them. The cows are milked in their stall.

 

    Tile Drainage
    Porous drain pipe is buried 0.75 to 1 metre down in the soil of a field allowing water to move to the pipe and drain away quickly. This allows farmers to begin working in their fields earlier in the spring because the excess water is drained away, and yields are increased.

 

    Tilling / Tillage
    Ploughing, cultivating or otherwise working up soil to prepare it for planting.

 

    Tilth
    A term referring to the physical condition of the soil in respect to its suitability for planting crops. Factors used to determine tilth include aeration, moisture content, aggregation of soil particles, drainage and water infiltration.

 

    Tom Turkey
    Adult, male turkeys. They can weigh between eight and 20 kg and have a wing span of up to 1.5 metres. It is only Tom turkeys that make the famous “gobble gobble” sound.

 

    Transponder tag
    A tag with a computer chip that identifies an animal and transmits information about its feed intake or milk output to the farm’s computer (for statistical purposes).

 
U

    Udder
    The udder is the mammary organ that secretes the animal’s milk. A cow’s udder has four teats. A goat’s udder has two teats.

 
V

    Ventilation
    Ventilation is extremely important in barns as animals and poultry need to have access to fresh air year-round. There are several types of ventilation systems that are adaptable to the change in seasons.

 

    Veterinarian
    A doctor for animals and poultry.

 
W

    Watershed
    An area of land that collects and discharges water into a single stream or other outlet. Also called a catchment or drainage basin.

 

    Wattle
    The reddish-pink flesh-like covering on the throat and neck of a turkey. It helps to release extra body heat.

 

    Weaned
    This term is used to describe the stage when animals are taken off their mother’s milk and fed solid foods, like grasses.

 

    Wether
    A neutered male sheep.


===


A Beginning Farmer’s Guide to Agriculture Words, Terms and Definitions l A

Acidic: A soil pH of less than 7.0. The
lower the number, the more acidic the
soil will be. The pH scale ranges from
0 to 14, with 7 as neutral.
Acre: U.S. standard unit of
measurement for agricultural land. It is
equivalent to 43,560 square feet.
Aeration: Involves the process
of creating small holes in the soil,
allowing air, water and nutrients to
travel to the plant roots.
Agronomy: The science of crop
production.
Alkaline: A soil pH of more than 7.0. The
higher the number, the more alkaline
(base) the soil will be. The pH scale
ranges from 0 to 14, with 7 as neutral.
Alliance: An association formed for
mutual benefit, such as in the beef,
grape/wine or other industry (horizontal
or vertical) to improve profitability with
increased coordination of production,
processing and/or merchandising.
Animal Husbandry: The proper
breeding, feeding and care of farm
animals.
Annual: A plant that completes its
life cycle by growing from a seed
and producing more seed for future
crops before its death in one year or
growing season.
Apiary: A place where honeybees are
kept; colonies of bees in hives.
Aquaculture: The commercial
production of aquatic plants or animals
in a controlled environment.
Aquaponics: A system of aquaculture
in which the waste produced by
farmed fish or other aquatic animals
supplies nutrients for plants grown
hydroponically, which, in turn, purifies
the water.
Artificial Insemination (AI): The
mechanical injection of semen into
the womb of the female animal with a
syringe-like apparatus.
Auction: A method of marketing
livestock and/or produce through which
an auctioneer sells to the highest bidder.
Auction Market/Auction Barn: A
facility where livestock producers
and fruit and vegetable growers bring
commodities to be sold via auction.
This is the most common method of
marketing livestock. Auction markets
primarily host live sales of livestock
on the premises, while some auction
markets also host video sales.
Available Water Holding Capacity
(AWHC): The quantity of water held
in soil that is available for plants to
use. As a rule, the deeper the soil, the
greater its AWHC.
Avian: Pertaining to poultry and/or fowl.
Backgrounding: The feeding and
management of meat animals from
the time they are weaned as calves
until they are on a finishing ration in
the feedlot.
Bareroot: Dormant plants, ready for
transplanting, shipping or storage with
exposed roots (soil removed).
Barrow: Male pig castrated before
sexual maturity.
Basis: The difference between the
cash market price and the futures
market price of a commodity.
Best Management Practices (BMP):
A practice or combination of practices
determined to be effective and practical
(given technological, economic and
institutional considerations) to manage
nutrients to protect surface and
groundwater as well as topsoil.
Biennial: A plant, or portion of a plant,
that completes its life cycle in two
years. (Example: blackberry plants
have biennial canes and perennial
root systems).
Bloat: An abnormal condition
in ruminants characterized by a
distension of the rumen due to an
accumulation of gases. Can occur
in animals grazing lush, wet, legume
pastures when they are hungry.
Boar: Intact (not castrated) male pig.
Body Condition Scoring (BCS):
The relative fatness of an animal as
determined by a visual assessment
of the amount of fat and muscle
covering the bones of livestock. Body
Condition is generally scored on a 1 to
9 scale for cattle and horses, and a 1
to 5 scale for swine, sheep and dairy
animals. Regardless of species, the
lower the number indicates a thinner
animal. A number 1 score indicates
emaciated, and the highest score
indicates very obese.
Bolting: When a plant produces
flowers or seeds prematurely instead
of a crop. This is usually the result of
excessive heat and sun exposure.
Boner: A moderate conditioned cull
cow with a body condition score of 5
or 6. Most well-conditioned cows fall in
this category.
Boot: Stage of grass maturity right
before the seed head emerges.
Bovine: Family of animals that
includes beef and dairy cattle.
Breaker: Highest conditioned cull
cow, carrying heavy flesh and having
a high dressing percent. Dressing
percentage is the portion (percentage)
of the live weight that remains in
the carcass. Body condition score is
generally 7 or higher.
Broadcast: Method of seeding,
fertilizing or pesticide application where
the material is spread in a wide pattern
onto the soil surface.
Buck: A male goat. Also referred to
as “billy.”
Bull: A sexually mature, uncastrated
bovine.
Burndown: A method of preparing fields
for no-till seeding by using a herbicide
that kills all growing vegetation.
Calf: A young male or female bovine
animal under 1 year of age.
Capon: A male chicken castrated
before reaching sexual maturity.
Caprine: Of, relating to, or being a goat.
Carrying Capacity: Refers to the
number of animals a pasture can
sustain without degradation during a
given grazing period.
Checkoff Programs: Research and
promotion programs authorized by state
and/or federal law and financed by
assessments. The programs are paid for
by specific industry members, such as
producers, importers and handlers.
Chisel Plow: A soil tillage tool that
consists of a series of straight steel
shanks, which when pulled through
the soil, till only a narrow furrow of soil.
This is considered a minimum tillage
practice that helps reduce the risk of
soil erosion.
Cockerel: A young rooster not more
than a year old.
Colt: A male horse or pony 4 years
of age or younger that has not been
castrated.
Companion planting: The belief that
two plants growing near each other
produce mutual benefits.
Compost: Organic residues, or a
mixture of organic residues and soil,
that have been piled, moistened
and allowed to undergo biological
decomposition for use in fertilizer.
Conservation Tillage: Designed to
minimize soil erosion; any of several
farming methods providing for seed
germination, plant growth and weed
control while maintaining effective
ground cover throughout the years
and minimal disturbance of the soil.
No-till is the most restrictive form of
conservation tillage. Other practices or
forms of minimum tillage would include
ridge till, strip-till and mulch-till.
Continuous Grazing: Refers to a
grazing system where animals are left to
graze in a field for an extended period.
Conventional Tillage/Seeding: Refers
to a form of field preparation and
seeding where the soil is moldboard
plowed and/or disked prior to seeding.
Cover Crop: A close-growing crop that
is grown to protect and improve soil
between periods of regular crops or
between trees and vines in orchards
and vineyards.
Cow: A mature bovine usually having
had at least one calf.
Cow Calf Operation: A management
unit that maintains a breeding herd and
produces weaned calves.
Creep Feeding: The special feeding
of calves during the weaning period
that helps young ruminant animals
transition to forage-based diets.
Crop Residue: The plant material left in
the field following the harvest of a crop.
Crop Rotation: The practice of
growing different crops in succession
on the same land.
Crop Year: Generally, the 12-month
period from the end of one year’s
harvest to the next.
Cross-pollination: The transfer of
pollen from the anther of a flower to the
stigma of another flower in a different
plant of the same or different species.
Cull: Refers to animals to be
eliminated from the livestock operation
due to production and/or management
reasons or to fruits and vegetables not
meeting minimal market standards.
Cultivate: The mechanical removal or
destruction of weeds competing with
crops for space, nutrients, water and
sunlight; also refers to plants grown
intentionally as in they cultivated a
variety of vegetable crops on their farm.
Cultivation: The act of cultivating. The
act of caring for and growing plants;
the ways farmers take care of crops.
Cutting: A plant propagation method
wherein a part of a plant is cut and
dipped in a rooting hormone to
eventually grow into a new plant.
CWT: Abbreviation for hundredweight
and the unit in which most prices are
quoted ($/cwt.) C for Centum — a
hundred; and Wt. for weight.
Dam: The mother or female parent of
an animal.
Dead Heading: The act of pinching or
cutting off spent flowers.
Deferred Grazing (Stockpiling):
Refers to a grazing practice where
forages can grow for a period before
they are grazed by animals.
Direct Sowing: Germinating seeds
at the site you want them to grow,
as opposed to growing them indoors
before transplanting.
Disc or Disk Harrow: A harrow with
sharp-edged slightly concave discs
mounted on horizontal shafts and used
to cut clods or debris on the surface of
soil or to cover seed after planting.
Doe: A female of the goat, deer or
rabbit family. Female goats with kids are
sometimes referred to as nanny goats.
Double Cropping: Raising two
different crops on the same area within
one growing season.
Dressed Weight: The weight of a
carcass following removal of hide and
entrails.
Dry Cow: A dairy cow that goes out
of the milk production herd during the
last 45-90 days of pregnancy. The dry
period is an important resting period for
the dairy cow, where fresh udder tissue
is formed in readiness for lactation, and
it provides an important opportunity
to rid the udder of many potential
pathogens that can cause mastitis.
Dry Matter: Refers to the part of feed
that is not water.
Endophyte (fungus): Any type of
fungus living in a plant (endo, within;
phyte, plant) without causing harm to
the plant’s appearance.
Erosion: The process by which soil is
moved from one location to another by
wind or water.
4 l How to “Talk” Farming
Equine: Of, relating to, or resembling a
horse or the horse family.
Everblooming: A flower that
produces a continual supply of blooms
throughout a season.
Ewe: A mature female sheep.
Fall Calving Season: A defined
calving season where calves are born
in late summer to early fall. Utilized
because it generally occurs during the
warm, dry months of the year, and calf
prices are usually at their seasonal
high at the time of weaning.
Family: One group used in classifying
organisms. Families consist of several
similar genera (plural for genus).
Farm: Any agricultural tract of land,
with improvements, generating $1,000
or more in sales, or that normally
would have been sold in the year, can
be listed as a farm in the U.S. census.
Farm Service Agency (FSA): A branch
of the USDA. The FSA administers
farm commodity, crop insurance, credit,
environmental, conservation and
emergency assistance programs for
farmers and ranchers.
Farrow: To give birth to a litter of pigs.
Fat/Fed/Finished/Live Cattle: Steers
and heifers fed a nutrient-dense
ration for the purpose of growing the
animals, usually for 90-180 days in a
feedlot or until they reach a desired
slaughter weight.
Feeder: Refers to a meat-type animal of
sufficient age and weight to be put into
a feedlot for finishing prior to slaughter.
Feeder Cattle Grades: A grading
system for feeder cattle to predict the
slaughter weight endpoint to a desirable
fat-to-lean composition. Frame size and
thickness are the two criteria used to
determine feeder cattle grades.
Feed Grain: Any of several grains
most commonly used for livestock or
poultry feed, such as corn.
Feedlot/Feed Yard: An animal feeding
operation used to intensively feed and
grow cattle for finishing.
Fertilizer: One that fertilizes;
specifically: a substance (manure,
plant and animal byproducts, chemical
mixtures, etc.) used to make soil more
fertile by supplying plant nutrients.
Fescue Toxicity: Refers to the toxic
effects to animals resulting from the
grazing of tall fescue infected with
endophyte fungus.
Filly: A female horse or pony up to 4
years of age that has not foaled.
Finishing: Refers to the process of
feeding out feeder animals in a feedlot
until they reach slaughter weight.
Flash Grazing: Refers to the process of
heavily stocking an area of pasture for a
very brief period. This is done to prevent
excessive growth of the forage.
Foal: Of a horse (equine), up to 1
year old.
Fodder: Most often refers to the
corn stalks and leaves left in the field
following grain harvest, which can be
used as a coarse animal feed.
Forage: Vegetative matter, fresh or
preserved, that is gathered and fed to
animals as roughage; includes alfalfa
hay, corn silage, pasture and grass-
based hay.
Founder: The inflammation in the foot
of a horse, sheep or goat. This is also
known as laminitis. It can be caused
by overeating grain, green forage,
cold weather, severe concussion or
excessive stress.
Frame Score: Score based on visual
evaluation of skeletal size of a beef
animal or by measuring hip height
(from the ground to top of hips) and is
calculated as a function of age.
Freshening: When milk production
begins in a cow after a calf is born.
Full Sun: If a plant requires “full sun”
then it needs at least six hours of direct
sunlight each day to thrive.
Fungicide: A chemical substance
used as a spray, dust or disinfectant
to kill fungi infesting plants, animals
or seed. Fungicides may be derived
from natural (organic) or synthetic
(inorganic) sources.
Ewe
Foal
A Beginning Farmer’s Guide to Agriculture Words, Terms and Definitions l 5
Furrow: Refers to a trench made in the
soil by tillage equipment.
Gelding: A castrated male horse.
Genus: A group of closely related
species of plants.
Germinate: The beginning of growth in
a seed; to sprout.
Gilt: A young female swine that has not
given birth.
Genetically Modified Organism
(GMO): They are the result of a
specific type of plant breeding where
precise changes are made to the
plant’s DNA to give it characteristics
that cannot be achieved through
traditional breeding methods.
Realistically, GMO refers to turning off
or moving a gene from one place to
another within the plant or inserting a
gene from another source.
Good Agricultural Practices (GAP):
Good Agricultural Practices are
voluntary audits that verify that fruits
and vegetables are produced, packed,
handled and stored as safely as
possible to minimize risks of microbial
food safety hazards.
Graded Feeder Calf Sale: A sale in
which feeder calves are graded and
grouped — based on muscling, frame
score, color and weight — to form
larger uniform lots for sale.
Grass Fed: Livestock raised solely on
grass, pasture or other forages.
Grass Tetany: A metabolic disorder
of cattle and sheep grazing on lush
grass pastures. It is characterized by
magnesium deficiency.
Greenbelt or Greenbelt Law:
Common term for the Agricultural,
Forest and Open Land Act of 1976.
This law allows qualified land to be
taxed based on its present use, not at
its market value.
Hardy: A plant capable of withstanding
freeze and/or frost exposure without
means of protection.
Hardiness Zone: A geographically
defined zone determined by
temperature that categorizes which
plants can thrive where; hardiness
zones are designated by a number (1-
11), such as zone 7. Gardening books
and websites can help in determining
hardiness zones.
Hay: Forage harvested during the
growing season and preserved for later
feeding.
Heifer: A young female cow that has
not calved.
Heirloom: An open-pollinated plant
variety that has remained unchanged
through hybridization for at least 50-
100 years.
Hen: An adult female chicken or turkey.
Herbicide: Any agent used to destroy
or inhibit growth of plants. A herbicide
may be derived from organic or
inorganic materials.
Horticulture: The art and science of
cultivating plants.
Humus: The part of soil created from
decomposed plant matter.
Hybrid: The crossbreeding of two
plants of different species or varieties
with distinct characteristics.
Hydroponics: Growing plants without
soil; using mineral nutrient solutions in
a water solvent.
Insecticide: An agent that controls or
destroys insects. An insecticide may
be derived from organic or inorganic
materials.
Intensive Grazing: Refers to a grazing
system by which a pasture is heavily
stocked for a small number of days
then allowed to rest before being
grazed again.
Kid: A young goat.
Lamb: A young sheep.
Legumes: A family of plants with
the ability to fix nitrogen in the soil,
thus reducing the amount of nitrogen
fertilizer needed for a crop.
Horticulture
Hydroponics
6 l How to “Talk” Farming
Liming: Refers to the addition of
limestone or other basic (alkaline)
material to raise the soil pH.
Litter: Live birth of multiple offspring
of animals at one time from the same
mother.
Loam: Rich soil consisting of
approximately 25 percent clay, 50
percent silt and less than 50 percent
sand; considered ideal soil for
gardening and agriculture.
Load Lot: 48,000 to 50,000 pounds of
live animals. A common lot size when
marketing feeder cattle due to weight
limits when hauling cattle using a
semitrailer truck.
Mare: A female horse or pony.
Moldboard Plow: A farm tool having
one or more heavy blades to break the
soil and cut a furrow prior to sowing. Soil
is inverted or turned over in the process.
Muscling: Amount of lean meat in
a slaughter animal or carcass and
estimated on the live animal by thickness
of forearm muscle and hind quarters.
Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS): A branch of USDA.
NRCS is the primary federal agency
working with private landowners to
help them conserve, maintain and
improve natural resources. The Agency
emphasizes voluntary, science-based
conservation; technical assistance;
partnerships; incentive-based
programs; and cooperative problem
solving at the community level.
Naturalized: To plant randomly and
without a pattern.
Nitrogen: A chemical element
essential to all life forms. Nitrogen is
important for plant and animal growth.
No-Till Farming: Designed to control
soil erosion, a farming practice
leaving the soil undisturbed except for
fertilization and seeding operations.
Oddlot: Refers to livestock with a
physical trait that does not match other
livestock in a group.
Open Pollination: Plants whose
seeds develop through random,
natural pollination such as wind, field
movement or insect activity — not
through human involvement.
Organic: A fertilizer, pesticide or plant
food that is of animal or vegetable
origin; plants grown without the use of
synthetic chemicals.
Organic Farming: A production
system completely excluding the use
of synthetically compounded fertilizers,
pesticides or growth regulators.
Ornamental: Plants grown for
aesthetics, decorative and/or an
attractive appearance.
Ovine: Of or relating to sheep.
Overgrazing: Refers to the process of
allowing animals to graze a pasture for
long periods of time without giving the
plants an opportunity to recover.
Paddock: A subdivided section of
pasture used to more efficiently graze
a large field.
Perennial: Plants living for multiple
growing seasons.
Pesticide: Any substance used to
control or kill pests, such as insects,
weeds, animals, or microbes; may be
organic or synthetic.
Pinching Off: The periodic removal of
new, freshly grown leaves from a plant
to encourage growth.
Pistil: The female sexual reproductive,
seed-bearing organ of a flower,
consisting of an ovary, style and stigma.
Pollination: The transfer of pollen from
the stamen (male part of the flower)
to the pistil (female part of the flower),
followed by fertilization (germination of
the pollen grain), growth of the pollen
tube down the style and into the ovule
where a sperm cell fuses with an egg,
resulting in the formation of a seed.
Porcine: Of, affecting, or resembling a
pig or pigs.
Poult: A young turkey of either sex,
usually of less than 2 months of age.
Primal: The initial cut of meat from a
carcass during butchering.
Pullet: A female chicken less than a
year old, or a young female chicken
before she begins to lay eggs.
Preconditioning: Completing one
or more management practices such
as dehorning, castration, weaning,
vaccination and training cattle to eat
from a feed bunk.
Pruning: The process of trimming a
shrub, tree or bush by cutting away
dead or overgrown branches or stems
to increase fruitfulness and growth or
to maintain a certain size or shape.
Purebred: An animal having parents of
the same breed that are eligible to be
recorded with a registry association.
Quality Grade: An evaluation of the
degree of marbling (intramuscular fat)
and degree of maturity affecting the
tenderness, juiciness and flavor of
beef, pork or lamb.
Raised Bed: An elevated garden bed
offering better drainage, aeration and
warmer soil than a conventional bed.
Ram: An uncastrated male sheep.
Rooster: An adult male chicken, also
known as a cock.
Row: Several objects arranged in
a usually straight line (i.e., a row of
corn) also, the line along which such
subjects are arranged (i.e., the corn
was planted in parallel rows).
Ruminants: Livestock such as cattle,
sheep and goats. Their digestive
system is unique, allowing them to
better use high roughage feedstuffs,
including forages. They possess a
four-compartment stomach designed to
ferment feedstuffs and provide energy.
Seedling: A plant that has just
emerged from its seed with its first
root, stem and leaves.
Self-pollinating: Plants not requiring
pollen from another plant to produce
fruit.
Shoat: A weaned young pig of either
sex.
Shrink: The loss of body weight an
animal experiences when gathered,
transported or held in a pen (overnight)
to be transported the next day.
Side Dressing: A method of
fertilization where a little fertilizer is
applied to soil near a plant.
Sire: The father or male parent of an
animal.
Sludge: Solid sediment left over from
industrial wastewater treatment plants
that is commonly used as a fertilizer
or livestock food additive because
it contains high levels of nutrients;
however, it may contain high levels of
heavy metals and pollutants.
Soil Depth: The effective depth of
a soil for plant growth is the vertical
distance into the soil from the surface
to a layer essentially stopping the
downward growth of plant roots. The
barrier layer may be rock, sand, gravel,
heavy clay, etc.
Sow: A female hog that has produced
at least one litter of pigs.
Spring Calving Season: A defined
calving season where calves are born
in late winter and early spring. A spring
calving season is often utilized because
of cool-season forage availability
immediately following calving and it
allows producers to wean and market
calves prior to winter, which means the
producers do not incur winter feeding
costs for the calves.
Springing: A cow starting to make the
changes, meaning calving is close,
especially noting the udder beginning
to fill with milk prior to calving.
Staking: The practice of driving a
support into the ground next to a plant
to support its growth.
Stallion: An uncastrated mature male
horse or pony.
Stamen: The male reproductive organ
of a flower, consisting of a filament and
a pollen-containing anther.
Steer: A male bovine castrated before
reaching sexual maturity.
Stocker Cattle: Cattle weaned and
placed on grass or a growing ration
prior to entering the feedlot.
Seedling
8 l How to “Talk” Farming
Stocking Rate: Number and classes
of animals grazing an acre of land for a
specific time.
TAEP: Tennessee Agriculture
Enhancement Program – A cost-share
program administered through the
Tennessee Department of Agriculture.
TDA: Tennessee Department of
Agriculture.
Thinning: To reduce the number
of excess seedlings (discarding
the weakest ones) to allow better
air circulation and increase light for
foliage, thereby encouraging remaining
plants to thrive. In fruit crops, thinning
involves removal of some of the fruit to
allow the remaining fruit to attain better
size and quality and to enable the plant
to initiate fruit buds for cropping in the
following year.
Till: To work soil in preparation for
planting a crop.
Tillage: The act of tilling the soil.
Tillage includes turning with a plow,
disking, harrowing, dragging, etc.
Normally tillage involves significant
disturbance of the soil.
Transplant: To remove plants from
one place and replant them in another
(or from a container into the ground).
Trellis: A support system for plants
allowing the positioning of shoots,
foliage and fruits for maximum
interception of sunlight, air and spray
circulation and ease of management.
Tom: A male turkey.
Top-dress: To apply a material such
as fertilizer, manure, compost, etc., to
the surface of the soil.
Turning Plow: A plow designed to
pulverize a ribbon of earth a few inches
wide and turn it over so that surface
trash is buried. The turning plow uses
a moldboard to do the turning.
Udder: Mammary gland.
Under Grazing: The poor pasture
management practice allowing
vegetation to become over mature
before animals have an opportunity
to graze.
Unit (of Fertilizer): Amount necessary
to give 1 pound of the desired nutrient.
USDA: United States Department of
Agriculture.
UT-TSU Extension: An educational
arm of each university assisting
farmers, families, youth and
communities to improve their quality
of life and solve problems through the
application of research and evidenced-
based knowledge.
Vermiculite: A lightweight, flaky
mineral called “mica” that has been
heated to the point of expansion.
The sponge-like granules are then
capable of holding both water and air.
This amendment is added to potting
mixtures and container gardens to
improve root growth due to aeration
and moisture retention.
Video Sales: A marketing method
where cattle are video recorded on
the farm, and the video is broadcast
via satellite television, internet and/
or a smartphone. Buyers participate
in the public auction by telephone or
computer. These sales are generally
hosted by a marketing agency at their
place of business.
Waterlogged: Soil that is saturated
with water.
Wean: To separate calves from their
mothers (cows), allowing the cows to
recover their body condition and allow
for specialized feeding of the calves.
Weed: A plant growing in the “wrong
place.”
Wether: A castrated male sheep or goat.
Yearling: Livestock between 1 and 2
years of age.
